I am so, so disappointed. I know I set myself up for failure by loving <a href="">Babel</a> just so much, but what was I supposed to do? Not like it? Unfortunately that meant my expectations were pretty high, and try as I might I just could not stop comparing the two books. I promise, I said to myself the entire time I was reading this, "just imagine it's a new book by someone you don't know," but I couldn't. I found Kuang's writing in <i>Babel</i> to be genius, visceral, clever. It cracked me open. I was obsessed. I cried. I told everyone I knew to read it. Because of this, I also respect Kuang a lot. I respected the clarity of her thought, how she conveyed her ideas, the ability to write stark and sometimes painful things, because they matter. It was because of this that I kept finding it so hard to believe that I just wasn't liking <i>Katabasis</i>. I spent a lot of the book waiting for a twist that never came, because I just couldn't believe that this was it. Maybe that's on me. Maybe I would've liked it more had I had different expectations. But again, as I said, I had high expectations because she <i>had</i> done so well, and because I respected Kuang's writing so much. I think it would be worse if I didn't do that at all.

So, what didn't click for me? A lot, unfortunately. I kept saying, it just didn't have that *spark* that made me think, Oh, this is something special. There's a lot of good concepts in here, I'll say that much. It's clear Kuang has done her research. Perhaps too much research, but hey, I like Neal Stephenson books... Point being, she weaves in information from all sorts of different accounts about the Underworld to pin together as the lore of Hell. It's fairly interesting, and I found the system of magick in the book to be quite interesting too (although again, I'm sorry, I liked the one in <i>Babel</i> better). Magick that hinges on contradictions and paradoxes, on things that "break" our world or system of logic in some way, is quite a clever idea, and it's utilised in some fun ways (though I did find myself rather wishing for some that were a bit more unexpected near the end. There was a lot of fairly simple logic paradoxes that I heard before. At least the maths ones were sometimes more unexpected to me). The concept, also, that Hell is a campus was really quite fun to me. Especially in the first court, that of Pride, it was interesting to see that represented as a library. It's all, you know, tied up in hubris and truth and overinflation of onesself etc. Worked quite well. Then the second court, Desire, is a student centre, and that works pretty well as well. Unfortunately, after this point Kuang appears to have run out of ideas, because most of the rest of the courts are just barren wastelands of nothingness for the rest of the eight courts. Bit of a let down!

I found Alice Law to not be a particularly sympathetic heroine. For someone whose head we spend an awful lot of time inside of - the endless internal monologue tangents started to drive me a bit crazy, with the looping thoughts that barely went anywhere, as I slowly (literally) lost track of the plot - I didn't end the book feeling like I knew that much about who she was. Peter Murdoch quite interested me, and I'm certainly biased, but the peek inside of his world of someone who grew up chronically ill and put on a mask and pushes through it and can never be vulnerable was all really quite interesting to me and helped me connect with him as a character very rapidly. Alice however... I couldn't work out her motivations, I couldn't work out what she cared about. She didn't seem to treat people very nicely for much of the book, and doesn't interrogate people's interiority very well. It's fine for characters to have flaws, but these were pretty serious ones and while they were sometimes ruminated on, I didn't feel like they actually went anywhere, which was frustrating. This is a book called katabasis. It's about journeying; of course, I knew the story of their travels would be more important than the destination. That being said, I also just didn't really understand the journey that Alice went on. Where was she starting from? What did she learn? What changed? I found it difficult to understand. Multiple times throughout the book, big lore dumps are thrown down, where we are given additional information on Alice that sort of reframes what has already happened. But for me, they always just felt a bit awkward and clunky, and rather than going back and changing my understanding of who she was and what she'd done, they seemed mostly forward-looking. I found it hard to tie them backwards in to the story. 

This flows in to my feeling on the plotting itself - it was weird! I am of course probably not a seasoned enough critic to make these claims, so know I am only talking about how it read to me; it really felt like Kuang didn't plot this out before she started writing it, and just kind of came up with new ideas as she went along. I didn't get the feeling that hints were dropped earlier that tied back in, or that there was an overarching arc that we were moving along. It just felt like everytime she ran out of ideas for a section of the story that was happening, some sort of deus ex machina would happen to throw the characters in to a new situation, and then the story would continue. They're walking along one place and then oh! Someone appears and attacks them! But then aha, someone <i>else</i> appears and saves them, and takes them on a boat somewhere else. They were just being buffeted along the tides. Maybe that's the point. Maybe there's something deeper to be read in to that. But as a person reading the book, it just read as awkward! And of course, it's just weird for your main characters to not have agency or be moving the action. <spoiler>At the end of the book, I was just completely gobsmacked that the entire problem of how to get out of hell they've been working through for the whole book, was solved by Alice literally just being HANDED the solution, and that solution was just some random MacGuffin. Someone else literally just found it on the ground and then later gave it to her, without even really explaining why. Just like "oh yeah here's the ultimate contradiction from which you can derive anything, enjoy!". WHAT!! I really think I had a much better idea for the ending (which I was convinced was going to happen), which I will elaborate on at the end of this review.</spoiler>

Speaking of the plotting being awkward, I also thought the writing was too. It was just - clunky, a lot of the time. I didn't get swept away on the prose, because I was stuck on the surface, just noticing the sentences. It's hard to say what exactly was off the whole time, but something was. Here's my favourite weirdass sentence in the whole book : "She wanted to be good for the knob." It's so odd. 

<spoiler> My idea for the ending </spoiler>

- contrast in opinions on universityies (insularity)
- my idea on the ending vs macguffin
- professor grimes and his centrality
- tug of war between different books (start: lighthearted interesting idea: get thesis adviser out of hell. but it wasn't that... but it wasn't anything else. romance/ dark academia/ fantasy)
- romance ??6
- good thing: discussion of academia, women in it, high expectations, etc. Also, some quite funny references and in-jokes, i suppose.
- me getting the twist about peter sacrificing her partway through